This time.
Only five?
I said five last time. Yes.
Oh, okay. That's fine.
Yeah, cool. We are poised and listening carefully.
Okay. So, we conditionally support the Electoral Boundary
Amendment Bill as we agree with the principle to shift the
quota to be put in to every two
election cycles rather than every five years.
A bit of anomaly that you might remember that between 1993 and
2002, every election had new election boundaries.
Wow.
Yeah. Thank goodness I was a little kid and I wouldn't have known that
at the time.
I didn't even know that my local MP was Roger Sowry when I was a kid, and later had
his wife as a teacher at college.
Now, an interesting reason behind that is Wellington City Council.
Now, this is something that I do believe needs to be re-put out there.
Basically, 2018 representation review, and they couldn't use
2018 census statistics because they weren't available yet,
so they had to use 2013 data. Which, okay, that's all good.
However, in 2021, they enacted for a Maori ward,
and then they embedded the 2013 statistics data into it.
Which, this is what happens when you change from different mayors and leaderships.
And I wouldn't blame the mayor itself, I blame the council.
In 2024,
when
it potentially could be looked back up on the
cards, it was decided not to hold one because of how much it cost money.
Currently, Wellington City Council is operating on 2013 census
data in 2026 for its council wards.
Now, thankfully-
Unbelievable. You know that for sure?
Yes.
Well, the data that we're going-
Yeah
... is population adjustments that go with it. But they're guesstimates.
Well, but the guesstimates are from 2018.
Thankfully, in this triennium,
with Wellington City Council, we will actually have our ward boundaries accurately
calculated. But we do believe if the
Census Data Bill goes through and gets properly and gets its estimation
parts to work properly, this will make this particular bill
fantastically work, particularly for both local government and for
central government when it comes to working both general electorates, Maori
electorates, and Maori wards and city council
general wards as well, so that we can at least have a more accurate calculation
rather than the Wellington City Council currently still operating
on its 2013 population statistics.
Thank goodness, at least some of the other Wellington councils are actually working
on more modern
numbers. But I know Wellington's ones very well because I submitted on
both the consultation in
2018 and again in 2021 on trying to get
Paekākāriki sub-ward a third counselor, and in 2018.
2018? I think I'd just moved out of the area.
Yeah. Oh, no. In 2021, I didn't actually live in the constituency, but I still
was trying to push it because it was the odd one out.
So yeah, we would like to see potentially a shift.
This bill, if it can tie with the other one to proceed, to hopefully have more
accurate council boundaries.
Very good. Very succinct.
Yeah.
Clear messages.
Questions? Or-
No, no.
I kind of already answered what they were.
I think. No, well, we're just starting on this side, so thank you.
Hey, thanks again for coming today.
Thank you.
Appreciate it.
Yeah.
We really do. Right. Now, Fiona, hopefully, by
Zoom. Is that right?
Fiona is not with us at the moment.
Okay. The next submitter, just to be clear,
is the Pirirakau Tribal
Authority.
Or something like that. Yeah.
Heta, are you available?
Yes.
Nice to have-
Oh, yeah, we can see you now, too. Great. Now, we've got 10 minutes with you.
Looking forward to hearing what you've got to say.
Ka pai. Kia ora, tatou. And
I'm
speaking on behalf of Pirirakau Tribal Authority, as our
Kaihautū.
We oppose the Electoral District Boundaries Amendment Bill
2026. This bill deliberately slows
how representation keeps up with population.
Right now, the Maori population and enrollment growth already justifies
an additional Maori seat. An eighth seat is
due. That's based on the current data, not projections.
But instead of allowing that adjustment, the Electoral District Boundaries
Amendment Bill changes the timing rules, delaying that process
further. This is not neutral. This creates a
representation lag by design.
Boundary reviews are pushed out to every second
parliamentary term.
New counting rules exclude recent data, and the system
locks in that delay.
The result is simple:
Maori representation falls behind where it should be.
For Pirirakau, this has a real impact.
We represent thousands of whanau across our Marae.
Our population is growing, our enrollment is growing.
If seats do not increase where the numbers justify it, then our
voting powers,
in effect, is reduced.This is also inconsistent with
the Crown's own actions. In 2025, the Crown
apologized to Ngā Hapu o Ngāti Ranginui, including Pirirakau.
It acknowledged our rangatiratanga and committed to a relationship
based on partnership and equity. And here we are, one year
later, the Electoral District Boundaries Amendment Bill proposes a
system that delays Māori representation.
Those two positions can't coexist.
Under Te Tiriti, this matters.
Active protection means protecting Māori participation.
Equity means our representation must keep pace with
our population. This bill does neither.
It also raises a basic democratic issue.
If the population grows, but representation
does not adjust in time,
then some votes are worth less than others.
That affects Māori most of all, but affects actually the integrity of the whole
system.
And this isn't something that can just be fixed
later.
If the next election runs without an additional Māori seat that
is already justified, that loss of representation is
real and permanent for that cycle. You can't rewind that.
So our position is clear. Withdraw the Electoral District Boundaries Amendment Bill
2026. Recognize that an eighth Māori seat is
already warranted, ensuring representation reflects the current
population, not delayed data.
So in closing,
this is not just an administrative change.
It's a decision about whether representation keeps pace
with the people. Right now, the numbers, as I've said, support increased
Māori representation. This bill stops that from happening when it
should,
which in our view, should be assessed as illegal, and that is why we oppose
this bill. Happy to take questions.
Okay. Thank you. Hey, thank you for that.
Can I just
ask, do you have a clear view why
the Māori electoral boundary's not going to be reviewed before the
2029 election? Do you have a clear understanding why that's taking place?
Sorry, could you clarify that question?
Sorry. Do you have a clear view as to why the electoral
boundary for Māori electorates are not going to be undertaken prior to
2029? Has anyone explained it to you from Stats New Zealand or
whoever, or Electoral Commission or whatever?
No.
No. Okay. Well, that's an issue in itself.
I've got a question hopefully from the chair.
No, I will-- Sorry. I will add to that, though.
Yeah.
Whether it's in 2029 or whether it goes with the current system of every
six years or every five years, the point is the amendment and the
adjustment can be made and adapted.
This bill can adapt it for it to happen now.
Yeah. No, I take your point.
That's my point.
Shannon, did you have a question? Sorry, I saw your hand go up and...
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mi hianga ki a koe e te tuakana.
Just to follow up from
Andrew's question there is, what's the motivation, I
guess, or what's your understanding of
why the government is putting through legislation that, in
fact, delays that opportunity of an eighth seat being
recognized?
I
won't speak for the government, though recent history would indicate that this is
consistent with several applications in terms of
things Māori, that have pushed Māori and slowed Māori progress
down. And this looks and appears to be a
continuation of that. It makes that assessment happen less.
And Māori, as we all know, is a very young population.
And so the chances are, and the numbers would indicate that the
likelihood is, is the numbers will go up, not down.
And so slowing that from every
five years to every six years slows that increased population or that
increased representation
in perpetuity.
All right. Hey,
thank you for your submission, and you've submitted on a few, so thank you for
coming back and-
Kia ora ra.
All right.
Kia ora.
Right. Now, are we going back to-
In person
... in person. Right. We've got,
Te Wahine Bora. Is that you
again? Oh, good. You're becoming a professional.
I doubt it. I don't know, sorry. Just trying my best.
Okay. Now we've got--
Do we have 10 minutes with you?
Okay.
Lena's not here, so that's good. Boy, he was intimidating.
He was rolling it.
Tena koutou, e te komiti aroha.
Ko Hakiperou, ko ku ingoa.
Oh, I'm nervous again.
I submit in opposition to aspects of
the Electoral District Boundaries Amendment Bill that affect the
timing, methodology, and underlying data used to
determine electoral boundaries, particularly where these
intersect with proposed changes within the Data and
Statistics Census Amendment Bill relating to the
calculation of the Māori electoral population,
MEP,
which is my area. This is where I've zoned in.
So I've learnt a lot. It's been great.
Section 79, determination of the Māori
electoral population. The proposed amendment to Section 79
(2) , which redefines counting day by
reference to Section 3 (1) , is a critical
change that requires closer scrutiny than it currently appears to be
receivingWhile presented as a technical
adjustment, this amendment has substantive implications
for how the MEP is determined in practice.
The concept of counting day is not neutral.
It directly influences which population data is
captured and how representation is calculated.
Public debate has focused on the risk that delayed
boundary reviews may lead to future under-representation
of Maori. However, this framing assumes that
the current MEP statistical formula is
equitable.
My grassroots analysis suggests that the
statistical formula is structurally flawed and
already underestimates
Maori descent population for electoral purposes.
Again,
the Maori ratio, no one is speaking about that.
The use of the Maori ratio is outdated.
I'm patient,
so I have no problem with the changes and
I think it's the represent-- Was it the Representation Commission you were
meaning? Which is why I'm
okay with delays because everything takes time and
there are specific things.
And again, I'm
finalizing a
private member's bill specifically about
addressing this.
Redefining counting day without addressing the underlying statistical
formula risks compounding the problem.
A flawed statistical formula
when applied to a newly defined or differently sourced
data set does not become more accurate.
It becomes less transparent and more difficult to
scrutinize.
So
one of my recommendations is to change the definition of
counting day. Changes to the definition of counting day
should not precede an isolation from a full independent
review of an electoral population
statistical
formula.
I did write an MEP
electoral population statistical formula review, but
like Chairman Bailey
pointed out last year, and I didn't get it,
that I was really focused on the MEP, but of course,
MEP
correlates with the general electoral population.
So if
the MEP
Maori seats increase by three, the general electorates are
going to decrease by three. And
in abolishing, basically, again, just briefly, I'll wrap it
up.
The
outdated use of the Maori ratio, we should have
10 Maori seats,
because that
takes
into account Maori on the general roll.
The
general electoral population can still have those numbers,
but without the
inequitable use of the Maori ratio,
it's actually 10. If it was total equity
within the statistical formula, we would have 14 seats,
and that's the total Maori descent population.
So I think 10 would be a much better choice in the
future.
And
just to finish off,
the methodology used to determine the MEP must be
transparent, independently reviewed,
and demonstrably equitable, including
considerations of obligations under Te Tiriti o
Waitangi as reflected in amendments in the Data and Statistics
Census Amendment Bill and recommended amendments to the Data and
Statistics Act 2022.
So thank you for this opportunity.
Any questions, anyone?
Right. Camilla.
Kia ora. Thank you. Thank you for submissions today and for being here with us.
I just had a question about the content of what is likely to be in the
bill around assessing the Maori population.
Mm-hmm.
What kind
of factors
are you considering including in that?
I
think it'll be an electoral population statistical formula
bill. It has to include the GDP as well because they
correlate, and
with the
more equitable
statistical formula options, which I've given two,
which would increase to 10 or increase to 14,
I think 10 might be more.
Anyway.
So the crux of it is the Maori ratio, which I
tried to speak on this morning.
So that would be in the bill, that's-
Yeah. In that bill and how it's worded, but it's not stated it's the
Maori ratio. It speaks of proportionate, which is just
an estimate, that it's an assumption of the
behavior of unenrolled Maori in the future is going to be the same as
enrolled. So the Maori ratio
is what has to be addressed
in the bill.
Now I've got a question from Parliament, Simon.
Thanks. We'll look forward to getting your bill, and we can-
Yeah, right. Exciting
... look over it in more detail because it sounds interesting.
Yeah, totally.
The idea around the Maori descent population's come up a few
times today, and you've said you think it's
underestimated.
But to accurately get that would just still be self-reporting,
so people would just say that they're of Maori descent?
Or how are you envisaging that we can better capture that?
That's not my area. Although I'm learning today.
Yeah.
I've learnt a lot today by the experts.
I think more work can be done with the Maori electorates, the Maori electorate
MPs, and iwi,
to work with Maori out there or even to get it out there,
to get
even more people enrolled. But not just that, just to
understand the process a little bit more.
I'm sort of losing it now.
That's okay.
But-
So we just need more people-
Yeah, so there are things that I personally think more can be done through the
Maori electorates. There's only seven, but
they've got iwi behind them,
and a lot of them are multi-billion dollar incorporations
now. So it's just
some think tanks.
We've previously canvassed this issue around
the formula, right? And so
as we said this morning, we responded to you on that, rightly or wrongly.
Mm.
The new issue that you're raising today is around the reference
counting day. Can you just be a little bit more specific why you think
that's unfair?
Well, why count Maori in the first place?
To
redefine the counting
day,
which isn't
neutral.
It connects to the counting day is all
about Maori data.
So
why should we even have a counting day?
You need a reference point.
For everyone.
It's a reference point when you determine what the population is, so
then you can calculate the electorate.
Right.
And one of the issues is whether you do it every five years or you do it every six
years.
One of the
advantages of this new system, it means that you could do it more timely, i.e.
more regularly.
Right.
And therefore, do it
every six years, if I understand this correctly.
Right.
Which means there's a more accurate representation of how many Maori are
there, for instance, on the roll.
Right. I'm all for more often.
Yeah. Okay.
More frequent. But what's the point of having
more frequent, more accurate data
collecting if that data does not produce
fairness or equity? It's still
under-represented. So I support that,
but the structure is flawed still.
So we're still going to be over here, more accurate, but still under-represented.
Okay. Pete, thank you again today.
No worries.
All right. Good stuff.
Thank you.
Right. Now, we are going to who?
We're now going to
Tanghi Karoro Native Nursery.
Yeah. Tanghi Karoro Nursery.
If you're available, that would be great.
Are they on screen?
Yep.
All right, cool.
Welcome if you're there.
How are you going?
Sorry, just realized I had my
camera and my mute button on.
No problem at all. Hey now, we've got 10 minutes with you.
Looking forward to hearing what you've got to say.
Tena koutou te whanau. Nga mihi kia koutou mo tenei taima, ki te
korero ki a koutou mo tenei kaupapa hohonu.
Timata au me te karakia.
He honore, he kororia ki te atua, he maunga rongo ki te whenua,
he whakaaro pai ki nga tangata katoa, ki tonu. Amene.
Kia ora.
Ko Whitematarau te maunga. Ko Awatere te awa.
Ko Ngati Porou te iwi. Ko Te Whanau-a-te-Atahi te hapu.
Ko Awatere te marae. Ko Matauru Wanoa
toku matua tipuna. Ko Wiremu raua ko
Valerie Wanoa oku matua. Nga mihi ki a koutou.
My name is Jessamin Wanoa, and thank you for
inviting me to participate. I really appreciate that.
And as you were saying, I'm from Tanghi Karoro Native Nursery.
My
wanting to participate is because
I am concerned that
many of the whanau where I'm from in Te Araroa,
which is on the east coast, the most eastern point of the North
Island-
Oh, okay
... a very isolated rural Maori community.
I'm currently in Auckland right now just because I'm here for Ahui,
but
normally you would find me in a little town called Te Araroa.
So,
I wanted to
support what our Iwi Chairs Forum
representatives said earlier. I've been watching at different times
throughout the day.
I particularly wanted to point out a
quote that I've written
from
Kiri Kowhai McKay: "If you don't count people, you do not see
them. If you don't see people, you don't serve
them."That's my concern
regarding the bill as it stands.
My concern is that
specific sectors of the community would be
left out, their voices would not be heard.
And also with the
proposed
delay with the census data that
not being collected in this current cycle, but being
collected later on if it's adopted.
I'm just concerned that there are many young
rangatahi who have now graduated from
local schools,
secondary schools. My daughter's one of them. She's now going to AUT.
Rangatahi who will be their first time voting
in this upcoming elections,
whose data
is significant. It's going to be important.
It's going to show the huge increase in the number of young
Maori that are going to be participating in
the elections and as voters.
What I've seen in
the amendment is that
our whanau who are incarcerated
will not have
the benefit of being able to vote
if it carries the way that it's written.
And I just wanted to point out that at least 70% of
women in prison at the moment are young Maori female,
and that is a huge concern
for our people.
Same with our men. Over 50% of our
male
prison population are Maori,
so that also is a concern to me. I
want to
see a more fair
way for our people forward, where they are able to
participate in the decisions that it can impact
hugely on their lives.
I want to see resources that can
help with the rehabilitation of our people.
But what I also wanted to point out is that--
Sorry, I'll just refer to my notes.
Iwi Maori are not advisors or priority communities.
We are your partners. I agree with that statement that Kiri Kofoed
mentioned earlier,
and also
when she mentioned about
many Maori are not even visible in government service data,
and that there are far-reaching consequences for iwi
and the Crown.
I'll give you an example of that in terms of what I do
as owner-operator, co-owner/operator with my dad for our
native plant nursery.
We have had our application
to participate in the
seed,
that because Te Rū Rakau is paying for the research,
they will own the IP
for anything that's taking fiber from
those trees that are grown on erosion-prone
land,
that they hope to then take that knowledge
onto other erosion-prone land up and down the State Highway 35.
I love the idea of us repopulating our
Te Tairawhiti region with native
tipuna rākau.
My concern is that
how does that sit with mana whenua when
those seeds are actually
taonga to us?
They come from our tipuna rākau, our taonga trees.
They represent the mana of our whenua
that we are kaitiaki of. If we are not in the data,
then the mana of what we represent is also not in the
data.
So that's why I'm saying that I totally agree
with our iwi chairs forum asking for
three solutions, a Maori descent population file,
an iwi Maori survey program, and a Maori descent census.
And I'll give you another example of why that matters.
In November last year, I took my daughter because she was very ill
with eczema,
and while we were waiting to be helped
for six hours,
in that time, we were seen once at the beginning when we first arrived,
and then much later on at 5:30 in the morning.
We arrived at something like 11:00 at night the night
before.
My daughter wasn't seen because I couldn't prove
that she was a New Zealand citizen born in New Zealand of
Maori descent.
She was born in that hospital, Middlemore Hospital.
Her father was born at Middlemore Hospital.
I am mana whenua as well as tangata whenua.
And still my daughter couldn't get the help that she needed.
Sorry about this.
That was the time we were meant to start.
But what I'm saying to you
is
if data was consistent
across
departments that represented
our ethnicity, our--
Sorry, I just need to get back to what I had written.
If there had already been a Maori descent population file,
that wouldn't have happened to my daughter.
She was bleeding, and we were visibleWhere we
were to everybody. There was no space for her to go
into a private room so that she could
at least not be so visible with all the eczema all over her
body. It was a really
traumatic experience for us as a whanau.
Not just the eczema, but to be asked to
justify being Maori, to justify being a New Zealand citizen,
and to have to justify
that we had the right to be treated in our own hospital where she was
born. So that's why this sort of
data is
important. It needs to be captured.
It needs to be shared across different
departments in the same
way
so that our children aren't victimized and traumatized this way.
It shouldn't be happening to any New Zealand
citizen,
not just Maori, but any New Zealand citizen.
But particularly because we have
whakapapa to Ngai Taketake. We have whakapapa to Ngati
Porou, Te Whanau-a-Apanui.
So yeah, it was
very damaging for us.
Hey. Well, thanks, Jasmine. And sorry to hear about your daughter.
I hope she's better now.
Yes, she is.
Good.
Now, we've got a question from Rima Nakle.
Thanks, Mr. Chair.
Jasmine, Rima Nakle, member of Parliament for Takaanini.
More a proposition again. I'm really sad to hear what you went through, and
if you'd like my office to follow up and
try and understand why you guys went through that, I'm
happy to take that on board, whether you're in my electorate or not, because
I think you deserve answers if something was untoward.
But I guess one of the aims for what we're doing is to
try and collate data in a more streamlined way.
But yeah, please feel free to contact me, Rima Nakle, and I'm happy
to try and understand more for you and your whanau how that happened.
Thank you, Rima. Kia ora.
All right.
I don't think we've got any questions for you, but similar
theme. So it's not that we don't understand the issue.
We've had a number of people raise the issue, so thank you for your
contribution this afternoon. Are you back home? Back home up north?
I will be going back home
next weekend.
All right. No doubt you
can't wait-
Back to Te Araroa
... can't wait to get back to the coast.
Oh, ka pai.
Okay.
Ka pai. Looking forward to it. Ka kite.
Bye-bye.
Ka kite.
Right. Now, are we going back to Fiona? We are.
No. She's-
No. Okay.
Done, yeah.
Right. It sounds like we're done pity about Fiona.
Now-
Private session
... we're going to Sam. I'm going to have to ask you and-
All of us
... yes, all of you, we're going into a private
session where we can talk about